

An acid–base reaction is a chemical reaction that occurs between an acid and a base. Several concepts that provide alternative definitions for the reaction mechanisms involved and their application in solving related problems exist. Despite several differences in definitions, their importance becomes apparent as different methods of analysis when applied to acid–base reactions for gaseous or liquid species, or when acid or base character may be somewhat less apparent. The first of these scientific concepts of acids and bases was provided by the French chemist Antoine Lavoisier, circa 1776. Miessler, G.L., Tarr, D. A., "Inorganic Chemistry" (1991) p. 166 – Table of discoveries attributes Antoine Lavoisier as the first to posit a scientific theory in relation to oxyacids. 

==Historic acid–base theories==
===Lavoisier's oxygen theory of acids===
The first scientific concept of acids and bases was provided by Lavoisier circa 1776. Since Lavoisier's knowledge of strong acids was mainly restricted to oxoacids, such as (nitric acid) and (sulphuric acid), which tend to contain central atoms in high oxidation states surrounded by oxygen, and since he was not aware of the true composition of the hydrohalic acids (HF, HCl, HBr, and HI), he defined acids in terms of their containing oxygen, which in fact he named from Greek words meaning "acid-former" (from the Greek οξυς (oxys) meaning "acid" or "sharp" and γεινομαι (geinomai) meaning "engender"). The Lavoisier definition was held as absolute truth for over 30 years, until the 1810 article and subsequent lectures by Sir Humphry Davy in which he proved the lack of oxygen in H2S, H2Te, and the hydrohalic acids. However, Davy failed to develop a new theory, concluding that "acidity does not depend upon any particular elementary substance, but upon peculiar arrangement of various substances". One notable modification of oxygen theory was provided by Berzelius, who stated that acids are oxides of nonmetals while bases are oxides of metals.

===Liebig's hydrogen theory of acids===
This definition was proposed by Justus von Liebig circa 1838, Miessler, G. L., Tarr, D. A., (1991) "Inorganic Chemistry" 2nd ed. Pearson Prentice-Hall p. 166 – table of discoveries attributes Justus von Liebig's publication as 1838 based on his extensive works on the chemical composition of organic acids. This finished the doctrinal shift from oxygen-based acids to hydrogen-based acids, started by Davy. According to Liebig, an acid is a hydrogen-containing substance in which the hydrogen could be replaced by a metal. Liebig's definition, while completely empirical, remained in use for almost 50 years until the adoption of the Arrhenius definition. H. L. Finston and A. C. Rychtman, A New View of Current Acid-Base Theories, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1983, pp. 140–146. 

==Common acid–base theories==
===Arrhenius definition===
Svante Arrhenius
The Arrhenius definition of acid–base reactions is a development of the hydrogen theory of acids, devised by Svante Arrhenius, which was used to provide a modern definition of acids and bases that followed from his work with Friedrich Wilhelm Ostwald in establishing the presence of ions in aqueous solution in 1884, and led to Arrhenius receiving the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1903 for "recognition of the extraordinary services... rendered to the advancement of chemistry by his electrolytic theory of dissociation". Miessler, G. L., Tarr, D. A., (1991) "Inorganic Chemistry" 2nd ed. Pearson Prentice-Hall p. 165 

As defined by Arrhenius, acid–base reactions are characterized by Arrhenius acids, which dissociate in aqueous solution to form hydrogen ions (), and Arrhenius bases, which form hydroxide () ions. More recent IUPAC recommendations now suggest the newer term "hydronium" Murray, K. K., Boyd, R. K., et al. (2006) "Standard definition of terms relating to mass spectrometry recommendations" International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry. – Please note that, in this document, there is no reference to deprecation of "oxonium", which is also still accepted as it remains in the IUPAC Gold book, but rather reveals preference for the term "Hydronium". be used in favor of the older accepted term "oxonium" International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (2006) IUPAC Compendium of Chemical Terminology, Electronic version Retrieved from International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry on 9 May 2007 on URL http://goldbook.iupac.org/O04379.html "Oxonium Ions" to illustrate reaction mechanisms such as those defined in the Brønsted–Lowry and solvent system definitions more clearly, with the Arrhenius definition serving as a simple general outline of acid–base character. The Arrhenius definition can be summarised as "Arrhenius acids form hydrogen ions in aqueous solution with Arrhenius bases forming hydroxide ions."

The universal aqueous acid–base definition of the Arrhenius concept is described as the formation of water from a proton and hydroxide ions, or hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions from the dissociation of an acid and base in aqueous solution:

: (aq) + (aq) 

(In modern times, the use of is regarded as a shorthand for 