

:For other uses, see Affection (disambiguation). "Petting" redirects here. For "heavy petting", see Non-penetrative sex.

A kiss can express affection.

Affection or fondness is a "disposition or rare state of mind or body" affection - Definitions from Dictionary.com that is often associated with a feeling or type of love. It has given rise to a number of branches of philosophy and psychology concerning emotion, disease, influence, state of being, 17th and 18th Century Theories of Emotions > Francis Hutcheson on the Emotions (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) and state of mind. "Affection" is popularly used to denote a feeling or type of love, amounting to more than goodwill or friendship. Writers on ethics generally use the word to refer to distinct states of feeling, both lasting and spasmodic. Some contrast it with passion as being free from the distinctively sensual element.

== Restricted definition ==
More specifically, the word has been restricted to emotional states, the object of which is a living thing such as a human or animal. In the former sense, it is the Greek "pathos" and as such it appears in the writings of French philosopher René Descartes, Dutch philosopher Baruch Spinoza, and most of the writings of early British ethicists. However, on various grounds (e.g., that it does not involve anxiety or excitement and that it is comparatively inert and compatible with the entire absence of the sensuous element), it is generally and usefully distinguished from passion. In this narrower sense the word has played a great part in ethical systems, which have spoken of the social or parental affections as in some sense a part of moral obligation. For a consideration of these and similar problems, which depend ultimately on the degree in which the affections are regarded as voluntary, see H. Sidgwick, Methods of Ethics pp. 345–349.

==Affectionate behavior==
Numerous behaviors are used by people to express affection. Some theories according to Communication professor Kory Floyd of Arizona State University suggest that affectionate behavior evolved from parental nurturing behavior due to its associations with hormonal rewards such as the release of oxytocin, the bonding hormone from positive social interactions. 
Research also verifies that expressions of affection, although commonly evaluated positively, can be considered negative if they pose implied threats to one's well being. Furthermore, affectionate behavior in positively valenced relationships may be associated with numerous health benefits. Other, more loving type gestures of affectionate behavior include obvious signs of liking a person.

==Psychology==

Affection shown between Johnny Cash and June Carter Cash

In psychology the terms affection and affective are of great importance. Experimentalists maintain that all emotional manifestations are forms of affection. Many psychologists have attempted to define or describe the nature of affection; however, experiments on feeling are difficult. Two characterizations of affection have been proposed. In the first, affective phenomena are divisible into categories of pleasurable and non-pleasurable. The main objections to this are that it does not explain the infinite variety of phenomena, and that it disregards the distinction that most philosophers maintain between "higher" and "lower" pleasures.. A second characterization is that every sensation has its specific affective quality, some of which may not have a precise name. Wilhelm Wundt maintains that there are three main affective directions which can describe all affective phenomena; these are (a) pleasure and displeasure, (b) tension and relaxation, and (c) excitement and depression. W. Wundt, Outlines of Psychology (trans. C. H. Judd, Leipzig, 1897) 

American psychologist Henry Murray developed a theory of personality that was organized in terms of motives, presses, and needs. According to Murray, these psychogenic needs function mostly on the unconscious level, but play a major role in our personality. Murray classified five affection needs:

+Five Affection Needs Need Definition 
 Affiliation Spending time with other people 
 Nurturance Taking care of another person 
 Play Having fun with others 
 Rejection Rejecting other people 
 Succorance Being helped or protected by others 

Two methods of experiment on affection have been tried:

#The first, introduced by A. Mosso, the Italian psychologist, consists in recording the physical phenomena that accompany modifications of the affective consciousness. Thus it is found that the action of the heart is accelerated by pleasant, and retarded by unpleasant, stimuli; again, changes of weight and volume are found to accompany modifications of affection—and so on. Apart altogether from the facts that this investigation is still in its infancy and that the conditions of experiment are insufficiently understood, its ultimate success is rendered highly problematical by the essential fact that real scientific results can be achieved only by data recorded in connection with a perfectly normal subject; a conscious or interested subject introduces variable factors that are probably incalculable.
#The second is Fechner's method; it consists of recording the changes in feeling-tone produced in a subject by bringing him in contact with a series of conditions, objects or stimuli graduated according to a scientific plan and presented singly in pairs or in groups. The result is a comparative table of likes and dislikes.

==Display of affection==

Instead of kissing, Manchu mothers used to show affection for their children by performing fellatio on their male babies, placing its penis in their mouths and stimulating it, since it was not considered a sexual act, while the Manchu regarded public kissing with revulsion, which was considered sexual. 

==See also==

* Affectional orientation
* Affectionism
* Affective filter
* Doctrine of the affections 

* List of terms of endearment
* Terms of endearment

==References==
Notes

Sources
* 

==External links==

*



