

Albert Lawrence Brooks (born Albert Lawrence Einstein; July 22, 1947) is an American actor, voice actor, writer, comedian, and director. He received an Academy Award nomination in 1987 "Academy Awards 1987". filmsite.org. for his role in Broadcast News. His voice acting credits include Marlin the clownfish in Finding Nemo, and recurring guest voices for the animated television series The Simpsons, including Russ Cargill in The Simpsons Movie.

==Early life==
Brooks was born in Beverly Hills, California, the son of Thelma Leeds (née Goodman), a singer and actress, and Harry Einstein, a radio comedian who performed on Eddie Cantor's radio program and was known as Parkyakarkus. Albert Brooks Biography (1947–). filmreference.com His brothers are comedic actor Bob Einstein, better known by his stage name "Super Dave Osborne," and Cliff Einstein, a partner and longtime chief creative officer at Los Angeles advertising agency Dailey & Associates. His half-brother was Charles Einstein (1926–2007), a writer for such television programs as Playhouse 90 and Lou Grant. Brooks is Jewish; his grandparents emigrated from Austria and Russia. He grew up among show business royalty in southern California, attending Beverly Hills High School with the likes of Richard Dreyfuss and Rob Reiner. Kaufman, Peter (January 22, 2006). "The background on Albert Brooks". The Washington Post, The Buffalo News. Accessed April 24, 2008. "Albert Brooks, who grew up in a showbiz family and attended Beverly Hills High School, has never been interested in being an outsider." 

==Career==
===Early career===
Brooks attended Carnegie Mellon in Pittsburgh, but dropped out after one year to focus on his comedy career. He changed his surname from Einstein (to avoid confusion with the famous physicist) and began a comedy career that quickly made him a regular on variety and talk shows during the late 1960s and early 1970s. Brooks led a new generation of self-reflective baby-boomer comics appearing on NBC's The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson. His onstage persona, that of an egotistical, narcissistic, nervous comic, an ironic showbiz insider who punctured himself before an audience by disassembling his mastery of comedic stagecraft, influenced other '70s post-modern comedians, including Steve Martin, Martin Mull and Andy Kaufman.

After two successful comedy albums, Comedy Minus One (1973) and the Grammy Award-nominated A Star Is Bought (1975), Brooks left the stand-up circuit to try his hand as a filmmaker; his first film, The Famous Comedians School, was a satiric short that appeared on PBS and was an early example of the mockumentary sub-genre. 

In 1975, he directed six short films for the first season of NBC's Saturday Night Live:
*October 11, 1975 episode (host: George Carlin) – "The Impossible Truth"
*October 18, 1975 episode (host: Paul Simon) – failed Candid Camera stunts and home movies
*October 25, 1975 episode (host: Rob Reiner) – heart surgery
*November 8, 1975 episode (host: Candice Bergen) – upcoming season
*December 13, 1975 episode (host: Richard Pryor) – sick
*January 9, 1976 episode (host: Elliott Gould) - audience test screening

In 1976 he appeared in his first mainstream film role, in Martin Scorsese's landmark Taxi Driver; Scorsese allowed Brooks to improvise much of his dialogue. The role reflected Brooks's decision to move to Los Angeles to enter the film business. In an interview, Brooks mentioned a conversation he'd had with Taxi Driver screenwriter Paul Schrader, in which Schrader said that Brooks's character was the only one in the movie that he could not "understand" – a remark that Brooks found amusing, as the movie's antihero was a psychotic loner.

Brooks directed his first feature film, Real Life, in 1979. The film, in which Brooks obnoxiously films a typical suburban family in an effort to win both an Oscar and a Nobel Prize, was a sendup of PBS's An American Family documentary. It has also been viewed as foretelling the future emergence of reality television. Montoya, Maria (February 28, 2009). "Albert Brooks 'Real Life' film is an unexpected classic". The Times-Picayune. Brooks also made a cameo appearance in the film Private Benjamin (1980), starring Goldie Hawn.

===1980s–1990s===
Through the 1980s and 1990s, Brooks co-wrote (with longtime collaborator Monica Johnson), directed and starred in a series of well-received comedies, playing variants on his standard neurotic and self-obsessed character. These include 1981's Modern Romance, where Brooks played a film editor desperate to win back his ex-girlfriend (Kathryn Harrold). The film received a limited release and ultimately grossed under $3 million domestically, but was well received by critics, with one reviewer commenting that the film was "not Brooks at his best, but still amusing". His best-received film, Lost in America (1985), featured Brooks and Julie Hagerty as a couple who leave their yuppie lifestyle and drop out of society to live in a motor home as they have always dreamed of doing. They meet comic disappointment.

Brooks's Defending Your Life (1991) placed his lead character in the afterlife, put on trial to justify his human fears and thus determine his cosmic fate. Critics responded to the offbeat premise and the surprising chemistry between Brooks and Meryl Streep as his post-death love interest. His later efforts did not find large audiences, but still retained Brooks's touch as a filmmaker. He garnered positive reviews for Mother (1996), which starred Brooks as a middle-aged writer moving back home to resolve tensions between himself and his mother (Debbie Reynolds). 1999's The Muse featured Brooks as a down-and-out Hollywood screenwriter using the services of an authentic muse (Sharon Stone) for inspiration.

Brooks has appeared as a guest voice on The Simpsons five times during its run (always under the name A. Brooks), and is described as the best guest star in the show's history by IGN, particularly for his role as supervillain Hank Scorpio in the episode "You Only Move Twice". 

Brooks also acted in other writers' and directors' films during the 1980s and 1990s. He had a cameo in the opening scene of , playing a driver whose passenger (Dan Aykroyd) has a shocking secret. In James L. Brooks's hit Broadcast News (1987), Albert Brooks was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor as an insecure, supremely ethical network TV reporter, who offers the rhetorical question, "Wouldn't this be a great world if insecurity and desperation made us more attractive?" He also won positive notices for his role in 1998's Out of Sight, playing an untrustworthy banker and ex-convict.

===2000s===
Brooks received positive reviews for his portrayal of a dying retail store owner who befriends disillusioned teen Leelee Sobieski in My First Mister (2001). Brooks continued his voiceover work in Disney and Pixar's Finding Nemo (2003), as the voice of "Marlin", one of the film's protagonists; Nemo is Brooks's largest grossing film to date.

In 2005, his film Looking for Comedy in the Muslim World was dropped by Sony Pictures due to their desire to change the title. Warner Independent Pictures purchased the film and gave it a limited release in January 2006; the film received mixed reviews and a low box office gross. The movie goes back to the days of Brooks's Real Life, as Brooks once again plays himself, a filmmaker commissioned by the U.S. government to see what makes the Muslim people laugh, thus sending him on a tour of India and Pakistan.

In 2006 he appeared in the documentary film Wanderlust as David Howard from "Lost in America". The documentary included many other well known people. In 2007, he continued his long term collaboration with The Simpsons by voicing Russ Cargill, the central antagonist of The Simpsons Movie.

He has played Lenny Botwin, Nancy Botwin's estranged father-in-law, on Showtime's television series Weeds. Ausiello, Michael (April 14, 2008). "Weeds Scoop: Albert Brooks Is Nancy's 'Dad'". TV Guide. St. Martin's Press published his first novel, (novel)|2030: The Real Story of What Happens to America], on May 10, 2011. 

In 2011, Brooks costarred as a vicious gangster heavy and the main antagonist in the motion picture Drive, alongside Ryan Gosling and Carey Mulligan, a role that has been given much critical praise and positive reviews, with several critics proclaiming Brooks' performance as one of the film's best aspects. After receiving awards and nominations from several film festivals and critic groups, but not an Academy Award nomination, Brooks responded humorously on Twitter, "And to the Academy: ‘You don't like me. You really don't like me’." 

==Personal life==
Brooks married Kimberly Shlain, an artist he met through a mutual friend. The couple have two children, Jacob Eli and Claire Elizabeth.

==Filmography==
===Films===

 Year Film Role Notes 
 1976 Taxi Driver Tom 
 1979 Real Life Albert Brooks Also Writer/Director 
 1980 Private Benjamin Yale Goodman 
 1981 Modern Romance Robert Cole Also Writer/Director 
 1983 Car Driver Segment: Prologue 
 1983 Terms of Endearment Voice of Rudyard Greenway Credited as \"A. Brooks\" 
 1984 Unfaithfully Yours Norman Robbins 
 1985 Lost in America David Howard Also Writer/DirectorNational Society of Film Critics Award for Best Screenplay 
 1987 Broadcast News Aaron Altman American Comedy Award for Funniest Male Supporting ActorBoston Society of Film Critics Award for Best ActorNominated – Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor2nd Place – National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Actor3rd Place – National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Supporting Actor 
 1991 Defending Your Life Daniel Miller Also Writer/Director 
 1994 I'll Do Anything Burke Adler 
 1994 Al Percolo Also Writer 
 1996 Mother John Henderson Also Writer/DirectorNational Society of Film Critics Award for Best ScreenplayNew York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Screenplay 
 1997 Critical Care Dr. Butz 
 1998 Dr. Dolittle Jacob the Tiger Voice role 
 1998 Out of Sight Richard Ripley 
 1999 Steven Phillips Also Writer/Director 
 2001 My First Mister Randall 'R' Harris 
 2003 Jerry Peyser 
 2003 Finding Nemo Marlin Voice role 
 2006 Looking for Comedy in the Muslim World Himself Also Writer/Director 
 2007 Russ Cargill Voice roleCredited as \"A. Brooks\" 
 2011 Drive Bernie Rose African American Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting ActorAustin Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting ActorAfrican-American Film Critics Association for Best Supporting ActorBoston Society of Film Critics Award for Best Supporting ActorChicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting ActorFlorida Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting ActorHouston Film Critics Society Award for Best Supporting ActorLas Vegas Film Critics Society Award for Best Supporting ActorNational Society of Film Critics Award for Best Supporting ActorNew York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting ActorNew York Film Critics Online Award for Best Supporting ActorOklahoma Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting ActorPhoenix Film Critics Society Award for Best Supporting ActorSan Francisco Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting ActorSatellite Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion PictureSt. Louis Gateway Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting ActorVillage Voice Film Poll - Supporting ActorWashington D.C. Area Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting ActorNominated - Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting ActorNominated - Central Ohio Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actor Nominated - Detroit Film Critics Society Award for Best Supporting ActorNominated - Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion PictureNominated - Independent Spirit Award for Best Supporting MaleNominated - Indiana Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actor Nominated - London Film Critics Circle Award for Supporting Actor of the YearNominated - Online Film Critics Society Award for Best Supporting ActorNominated - San Diego Film Critics Society Award for Best Supporting ActorNominated - Southeastern Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actor 
 2012 This Is 40 

===Television===

 Year Title Role Notes 
 1969 Hot Wheels Kip ChogiAdditional voices 
 1970 Rudy Episode 1.8: \"Oscar, the Model\" and Episode 1.11: \"Felix Is Missing\" 
 1971 Love, American Style Christopher Leacock Episode 2.16: \"Love and Operation Model/Love and the Sack\" 
 1972 Dr. Norman Episode 2.2: \"The Needle\" 
 1975–76 Saturday Night Live Additional characters Writer and director of several segments 
 1976 N/A television film; writer, editor and director 
 1990–2011 Various characters Appeared in six episodesCredited as \"A. Brooks\" 
 2008 Weeds Lenny Botwin Appeared in four episodes 

==References==

==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Interview: Albert Brooks: Comedy And Dystopia – On Point.



