

The aurochs ( or ; also urus, (Bos primigenius), the ancestor of domestic cattle, is a type of large wild cattle which inhabited Europe, Asia and North Africa, but which is now extinct; they survived in Europe until the last recorded aurochs, a female, died in the Jaktorów Forest, Poland in 1627.

During the early Holocene in course of the Neolithic Revolution, aurochs were domesticated in at least two domestication events: one related to the Indian subspecies, leading to Zebu cattle; the other one related to the Eurasian subspecies, leading to taurine cattle. Other species of wild bovines were domesticated as well, such as the wild water buffalo, Gaur, and Banteng. In modern cattle, numerous breeds share characteristics of the aurochs, such as a dark colour of the bulls with a light eel stripe and light colour in cows, or a typical aurochs-like horn shape.

==Taxonomy and etymology==
Illustration from Sigismund von Herberstein's book published in 1556 captioned : "I am 'urus', in Polish, in German (dunces call me bison)" ;Latin original: 

The aurochs was variously classified as Bos primigenius, Bos taurus, or, in old sources, Bos urus. In 2003, however, the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature "conserved the usage of 17 specific names based on wild species, which are pre-dated by or contemporary with those based on domestic forms", ICZN, Biodiversity Studies confirming Bos primigenius for the Aurochs. Taxonomists who consider domesticated cattle a subspecies of the wild Aurochs should use B. primigenius taurus; the name B. taurus remains available for domestic cattle where it is considered to be a separate species.

The words "aurochs", "urus", and "wisent" have all been used synonymously in English. AHD4, headwords "aurochs", "urus", "wisent". MWU, headwords "aurochs", "urus", "wisent". However, the extinct aurochs/urus is a completely separate species from the still-extant wisent. The two were often confused, and some 16th-century illustrations of aurochs and wisents have hybrid features. 
The word urus () comes to English from Latin, but may have come to Latin from Germanic origins. AHD4, headword "urus". It declines in English as urus (singular), uruses (plural). MWU, headword "urus". In the German language, Ur derived to Auer in course of a diphthongization in the language during the 13th century. Later, "-ochs" as added, which is meant to refer to a wild bovine. This is how the German name of the animal turned to Auerochs/Auerochse. 

The word "aurochs" comes to English from German, where its normal spelling and declension today is (singular), (genitive), (plural). The declension in English varies, being either "auroch" (singular), "aurochs" (plural) AHD4, headword "aurochs". MWU, headword "aurochs". or "aurochs" (singular), "aurochses" (plural). The declension "auroch" (singular), "aurochs" (plural), acknowledged by MWU, is a back-formation analogous to "pea"-from-"pease" derived from a misinterpretation of the singular form ending in the /s/ sound (being cognate to "ox/Ochs(e)"). The use in English of the plural form "" is not acknowledged by AHD4 or MWU, but is mentioned in The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language. It is directly parallel to the German plural and analogous (and cognate) to English "ox" (singular), "oxen" (plural).

The name of the aurochs in other languages seems to be derived by "urus" as well, such as uro (Spanish) or urokse (Danish). 

==Evolution==
Aurochs bull at the Zoological Museum in Copenhagen from 7400 BC 
During the Pliocene, the colder climate caused an extension of open grassland, which increased the evolution of large grazers, such as wild bovines. Bos acutifrons is an extinct species of cattle sometimes claimed to be the ancestor of aurochs, but it was a species with very long, outward-facing horns.
 
The oldest aurochs remains have been dated to about 2 million years, in India. The Indian subspecies was the first aurochs subspecies to appear. During the Pleistocene, the species migrated west into the Middle East (western Asia) as well as to the east. They reached Europe about 270,000 years ago. The South Asian domestic cattle, or zebu, descended from Indian aurochs at the edge of the Thar Desert; the zebu is resistant to drought. Domestic yak, gayal and Javan cattle do not descend from aurochs. 

The first complete mitochondrial genome (16,338 base pairs) DNA sequence analysis of Bos primigenius from an archaeologically verified and exceptionally well preserved aurochs bone sample was published in 2010. 

===Subspecies===
Three wild subspecies of aurochs are recognized. Only the Eurasian subspecies survived until recent times.:
*The Indian Aurochs (Bos primigenius namadicus) once inhabited India. It was the first subspecies of the aurochs to appear, at 2 million years ago, and from about 9000 years ago (BP), it was domesticated as zebu cattle. In the Light of Evolution III: Two Centuries of Darwin (2009), page 96, National Academies Press Fossil remains indicate there were wild Indian aurochs besides domesticated zebu cattle in Gujarat and the Ganges area until about 4,000-5,000 years ago. Remains from wild aurochs, 4,400 years old, are clearly identified from Karnataka in south India. Shanyuan Chen, Bang-Zhong Lin, Mumtaz Baig, Bikash Mitra, Ricardo J. Lopes, António M. Santos, David A. Magee, Marisa Azevedo, Pedro Tarroso, Shinji Sasazaki, Stephane Ostrowski, Osman Mahgoub, Tapas K. Chaudhuri, Ya-ping Zhang, Vânia Costa, Luis J. Royo, Félix Goyache, Gordon Luikart, Nicole Boivin, Dorian Q. Fuller, Hideyuki Mannen, Daniel G. Bradley, and Albano Beja-Pereira. "Zebu Cattle Are an Exclusive Legacy of the South Asia Neolithic", Mol Biol Evol (2010) 27(1): 1-6 first published online September 21, 2009 
*The Eurasian Aurochs (Bos primigenius primigenius) once ranged across the steppes and taigas of Europe, Siberia, and Central Asia. It is noted as part of the Pleistocene megafauna, and declined in numbers along with other megafauna species by the end of Pleistocene. The Eurasian aurochs were domesticated into modern taurine cattle breeds around the 6th millennium BC in the Middle East, and possibly also at about the same time in the Far East. Aurochs were still widespread in Europe during the time of the Roman Empire, when they were widely popular as a battle beast in Roman arenas. Excessive hunting began and continued until the species was nearly extinct. By the 13th century, aurochs existed only in low numbers in Eastern Europe, and the hunting of aurochs became a privilege of nobles, and later royal households. The aurochs were not saved from extinction, and the last recorded live aurochs, a female, died in 1627 in the Jaktorów Forest, Poland from natural causes. Aurochs were found to have lived on the island of Sicily, having migrated via a land bridge to Italy. After the disappearance of the land bridge, Sicilian aurochs evolved to a size 20% smaller than their mainland relatives.

*The North African Aurochs (Bos primigenius africanus) once lived in the woodland and shrubland of North Africa. It descended from Aurochs populations migrating from the Middle East. The North African aurochs was morphologically very similar to the Eurasian subspecies, so that this taxon may exist only in a biogeographic sense. There is evidence that it was genetically distinct from the Eurasian subspecies. Beja-Pereira et al.: The origin of European cattle: Evidence from modern and ancient DNA, 2006. North African aurochs possibly had a light saddle on their backs, as depictions indicate. This subspecies may have been extinct prior to the Middle Ages. 

== Description ==
Holocene aurochs bull skull in Berlin
The appearance of the aurochs is reconstructed by skeletal material, historical descriptions or contemporaneous depictions, such as cave paintings, engravings or Sigismund von Herberstein’s illustration. The work by Charles Hamilton Smith is a copy of a painting owned by a merchant in Augsburg, which may date to the 16th century. Scholars have proposed that Smith's illustration was based on a cattle/aurochs hybrid, or an aurochs-like breed. The aurochs was depicted in prehistoric cave paintings and described in Julius Caesar's The Gallic War.

The aurochs was one of the biggest herbivores in the postglacial Europe, comparable to the wisent, the European bison. The size of aurochs appeared to depend on the region. In Europe, aurochs populations of the north were bigger on average than those from the south. For example, during the Holocene, aurochs from Denmark and Germany had an average height at the shoulders of 155 – in bulls and 135 to 155 cm in cows, while aurochs populations in Hungary had bulls reaching 155 –. René Kysely: "Aurochs and potential crossbreeding with domestic cattle in Central Europe in the Eneolithic period. A metric analysis of bones from the archaeological site of Kutná Hora-Denemark (Czech Republic)", Anthropozoologica, 43(2), 2008. The body mass of aurochs appeared to have showed some variability. Some were comparable to the weights of the wisent or the banteng, reaching around 700 kg, whereas those from the late-middle Pleistocene were estimated to measure up to 1500 kg, the top mass of the gaur (the largest extant bovid). Cis van Vuure: Retracing the Aurochs - History, Morphology and Ecology of an extinct wild Ox. 2005, ISBN 954-642-235-5. The sexual dimorphism between bull and cow was strongly expressed, with the cows being several decimetres shorter than bulls on average.
Life restoration of the aurochs based on a bull skeleton from Lund and a cow skeleton from Copenhagen
Because of the massive horns, the frontal bones of aurochs were elongated and broad. The horns of the aurochs were characteristic for the species concerning size, curvature and orientation. They were curved in three directions: upwards-outwards at the base, then swung forwards-inwards, then inwards-upwards. Aurochs horns could reach 80 cm in length and between 10 and 20 cm in diameter. Walter Frisch: Der Auerochs: Das europäische Rind. 2010. ISBN 978-3-00-026764-2 The horns of bulls were larger, with the curvature more strongly expressed than in cows. The horns grew from the skull in a 60° angle to the snout, they are clearly facing forwards. The horn shape of aurochs was an advantage because of the way intraspecific fights were carried out: in contrast to bison, they do not butt their heads against each other, instead they hook each other with their horns and try to push away the adversary. Modern cattle breeds still exhibit this way of combat fight. As a protection for their eyes, the eye sockets of bulls were more strongly pronounced than in most contemporary cattle bulls. 

The body shape of the aurochs was strikingly different from many modern cattle breeds. For example, the legs were considerably longer and slender, resulting in a shoulder height that nearly equalled the trunk length. The skull, carrying the large horns, was substantially larger and more elongated than in most cattle breeds. Only some primitive Mediterranean cattle breeds, such as the Maremmana primitivo or Pajuna Cattle, exhibit those traits. As in other wild bovines, the body shape of the aurochs was athletic and, especially in bulls, showed a strongly expressed neck and shoulder musculature. Even in carrying cows, the udder was small and hardly visible from the side; this feature is equal to that of other wild bovines. 
Aurochs in a cave painting in Lascaux, France
The coat colour of the aurochs can be reconstructed by using historical and contemporary depictions. In his letter to Conrad Gesner (1602), Anton Schneeberger precisely describes the aurochs, a description that affirms cave paintings in Lascaux and Chauvet. Calves were born in chestnut colour; young bulls changed their coat colour during a few months into a very deep brown or black, with a white eel stripe running down the spine. Cows retained the reddish-brown colour. Typical for both sexes was the lightly coloured mouth, which is also found in some bantengs. Some North African engravings show aurochs with a light-colored "saddle" on the back, , but otherwise there is no evidence of a different coat colour of aurochsen in or outside Europe. A passage from Mucante (1596), describing the “wild ox” as gray, is ambiguous and may refer to the wisent. Egyptian grave paintings show cattle with a reddish-brown coat colour in both sexes with a light saddle, but the horn shape of these suggest they depict domestic cattle. Remains of aurochs hair were not known until the early 1980s. 

Some primitive cattle breeds display the coat colour characteristics of the aurochs, including the black colour in bulls with a light eel stripe, a white mouth, and the typical coloural sexual dimorphism. A feature often attributed to the aurochs are blond fronthead hairs. Historical descriptions tell that the aurochs had long and curly fronthead hair, but none mentions a certain colour for it. Cis van Vuure (2005) says that, although the color is present in a variety of primitive cattle breeds, it is likely a discolouration that appeared after domestication. But he notes that Gaurs have a lightly coloured fronthead as well. The gene responsible for this feature has not yet been identified. Zebuine breeds show lightly coloured inner sides of the legs and belly, caused by the so-called Zebu-tipping gene. It has not been tested if this gene is present in remains of the wild form of the zebu, the Indian aurochs. 

== Habitat, ecology and behaviour ==
Floodplain forests like this one in Germany were the last refuges during the aurochs' final centuries of existence.
There is no consensus concerning the habitat of the aurochs. While some authors think that the habitat selection of the aurochs was comparable to the African Forest Buffalo, others describe the species as inhabiting open grassland and helping maintain open areas by grazing, together with other large herbivores. Axel Beutler: Die Großtierfauna Europas und ihr Einfluss auf Vegetation und Landschaft. 1996. Magret Bunzel-Drüke, Joachim Drüke & Henning Vierhaus: Der Einfluss von Großherbivoren auf die Naturlandschaft Mitteleuropas. 2001. With its hypsodont jaw, the aurochs likely was a grazer and had a food selection very similar to domestic cattle. It was no browser like deer or a semi-intermediary feeder like the wisent. Comparisons of the isotope levels of Mesolithic aurochs and domestic cattle bones showed that aurochs likely inhabited wetter areas than domestic cattle. Anthony H. Lynch, Julie Hamilton & Robert E. M. Hedges: Where the Wild Things Are: Aurochs and Cattle in England. 2008. Schneeberger describes that, during winter, the aurochs ate twigs and acorns in addition to grasses. 

After the beginning of the Common Era, the habitat of aurochs became more fragmented because of the steadily growing human population. During the last centuries of its existence, the aurochs was limited to hideaway regions, such as floodplain forests or marshes, where there were no competing domestic herbivores and less hunting pressure. 

Like many bovids, aurochs formed herds for at least one part of the year. These probably did not number much more than thirty, likely were composed of cows with their calves and some young bulls. Older bulls probably wandered solely or in small bull herds outside the mating season. Assuming that the social behaviour between aurochs and descended domestic cattle is roughly the same, social status was gained through gestures and fights, which cows engage in as well as bulls. As in other ungulates that form unisexual herds, there was a considerable dimorphism. Selection forced especially large bulls as those that can survive alone can feed themselves better than within a herd. Ungulates that form herds containing animals of both sexes, such as horses, have weakly developed sexual dimorphism. Bunzel-Drüke, Finck, Kämmer, Luick, Reisinger, Riecken, Riedl, Scharf & Zimball: "Wilde Weiden: Praxisleitfaden für Ganzjahresbeweidung in Naturschutz und Landschaftsentwicklung 
A painting by Heinrich Harder showing an aurochs fighting off a Eurasian Wolf pack
During mating season, which likely took place during the late summer or early autumn, the bulls had severe fights. From evidence in the forest of Jaktorów, deaths could occur. During autumn, aurochs fed for the winter and got fatter and shinier than during the rest of the year, according to Schneeberger. During spring, the cows gave birth to the calves, for which they went into the forest. The mother stayed at the calf's side until it was strong enough to join and keep up with the herd on the feeding grounds. 

Calves were vulnerable to wolves, while healthy adult aurochs probably did not have to fear these predators. In prehistoric Europe, North Africa and Asia, big cats like lions or tigers and hyenas were additional predators that likely preyed on aurochs. 

Historical descriptions, like Caesar’s De Bello Gallico or Schneeberger, tell that aurochs were swift and fast, and could be very aggressive. According to Schneeberger, aurochs were not concerned when a man approached. But, teased or hunted, an aurochs could get very aggressive and dangerous, and throw the teasing person into the air, as he described in a 1602 letter to Gesner. But basically, the aurochs appeared to have been a peaceful animal to humans, as it was chosen for domestication. 

==Domestication and extinction==
This presumably female specimen is from around 7500 BC and is one of two very well-preserved aurochs skeletons found in Denmark. The Vig-aurochs can be seen at The National Museum of Denmark. The circles indicate where the animal was wounded by arrows.
The aurochs, which ranged throughout much of Eurasia and Northern Africa during the late Pleistocene and early Holocene, is widely accepted as the wild ancestor of modern cattle. Archaeological evidence shows that domestication occurred independently in the Near East and the Indian subcontinent between 10,000–8,000 years ago, giving rise to the two major domestic taxa observed today—humpless Bos taurus (taurine) and humped Bos indicus (zebu), respectively. This is confirmed by genetic analyses of matrilineal mitochondrial DNA sequences, which reveal a marked differentiation between modern Bos taurus and Bos indicus haplotypes, demonstrating their derivation from two geographically and genetically divergent wild populations. 

Domestication of the aurochs began in the southern Caucasus and northern Mesopotamia from about the 6th millennium BC. Genetic evidence suggests that aurochs were independently domesticated in India and possibly in northern Africa. Bradley DG, MacHugh DE, Cunningham P, Loftus RT, "Mitochondrial diversity and the origins of African and European cattle", Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, USA, May 14, 1996; 93(10):5131–5. Domesticated cattle and aurochs are so different in size that they have been regarded as separate species; however, large ancient cattle and aurochs "are difficult to classify because morphological traits have overlapping distributions in cattle and aurochs and diagnostic features are identified only in horn and some cranial element." Albano Beja-Pereira, et al., "The origin of European cattle: Evidence from modern and ancient DNA", PNAS, May 23, 2006, vol. 103, no. 21, 8113–8118 

A DNA study suggests that all the domesticated cattle originated from a group of 80 wild aurochs. Those animals lived in Iran 10,500 years ago. Molecular Biology and Evolution, March 14, 2012. 
Charles Hamliton Smith's copy of a painting possibly dating back to the 16th century 
Comparison of aurochs bones with those of modern cattle has provided many insights about the aurochs. Remains of the beast, from specimens believed to have weighed more than a ton, have been found in Mesolithic sites around Goldcliff, Wales. 
Though aurochs became extinct in Britain during the Bronze age, analysis of bones from aurochs that lived in the same age as domesticated cattle showed no genetic contribution to modern breeds. As a result of this study, modern European cattle were thought to have descended directly from the Near East domestication. Another study found distinct similarities between modern breeds and Italian aurochs specimens, which suggested that the previously tested British aurochs were not a good model of the diversity of aurochs genetics. It also suggests possible North African and European aurochs contributions to domestic breeds. Further genetic tests have shown that domestic cattle in Europe is of Near Eastern origin. The European aurochs was not domesticated, nor did it interbreed with the imported Near Eastern cattle. CJ Edwards, R Bollongino, A Scheu…, "Mitochondrial analysis shows a Neolithic Near Eastern origin for domestic cattle and no evidence of domestication of European aurochs". Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B, 2007 

Indian cattle (zebu), although domesticated eight to ten thousand years ago, are related to aurochs which diverged from the Near Eastern ones some 200,000 years ago. African cattle are thought to descend from aurochs more closely related to the Near Eastern ones. The Near East and African aurochs groups are thought to have split some 25,000 years ago, probably 15,000 years before domestication. The "Turano-Mongolian" type of cattle now found in Northern China, Mongolia, Korea and Japan may represent a fourth domestication event (and a third event among Bos taurus&ndash;type aurochs). This group may have diverged from the Near East group some 35,000 years ago. Whether these separate genetic populations would have equated to separate subspecies is unclear.

The maximum range of the aurochs was from Europe (excluding Ireland and northern Scandinavia), to northern Africa, the Middle East, India and Central Asia. Until at least 3000 years ago the aurochs was also found in Eastern China, where it is recorded at the Dingjiabao Reservoir in Yangyuan County. Most remains in China are known from the area east of 105° E, but the species has also been reported from the eastern margin of the Tibetan plateau close to Heihe River. Zong, G. (1984). "A record of Bos primigenius from the Quaternary of the Aba Tibetan Autonomous Region". Vertebrata PalAsiatica, Volume XXII No. 3, pp. 239–245 
The ornamented horn of the last aurochs bull
By the 13th century A.D., the aurochs' range was restricted to Poland, Lithuania, Moldavia, Transylvania and East Prussia. The right to hunt large animals on any land was restricted to nobles and gradually to the royal household. As the population of aurochs declined, hunting ceased, and the royal court used gamekeepers to provide open fields for grazing for the aurochs. The gamekeepers were exempted from local taxes in exchange for their service. Poaching aurochs was punishable by death. According to the royal survey in 1564, the gamekeepers knew of 38 animals. The last recorded live aurochs, a female, died in 1627 in the Jaktorów Forest, Poland from natural causes. The causes of extinction were hunting, a narrowing of habitat due to the development of farming, climatic changes, and diseases transmitted by domestic cattle. 

== Aurochs-like cattle breeds ==
Because some cattle breeds have been changed more than other breeds, certain breeds bear a greater resemblance to the aurochs. These breeds are not very productive from the economical point of view, as they do not give as much milk or meat as others. Most of the "primitive" phenotypes are facing extinction, because farmers give them up for economic reasons or crossbreed them with more productive dairy and meat cattle. Very hardy and robust, the primitive breeds are sometimes used in nature conservation programs, where they can fill the place of their wild ancestor in the ecology. Some have been integrated into the TaurOs Project, which goal is to breed a cattle type phenotypically, genotypically and ecologically as close to the aurochs as possible. TaurOs Project Such primitive breeds include: Caldela, Heck cattle, Limia Cattle, Maremmana primitivo, Maronesa, Pajuna Cattle, Rhodopian Shorthorn FREE Nature über das Rodopische Kurzhorn-Rind , Sayaguesa Cattle, Spanish Fighting Bull and Tudanca Cattle.

Image:Miura-est.jpg|Spanish Fighting Bulls bear considerable resemblance to the aurochs in features such as body shape, proportions, horn shape and sometimes coat colour
Image:TudancaBull.JPG|Tudanca Cattle is a primitive Iberian cattle breed
Image:MaremmanerBulle.jpg|The most primitive lineages of Maremmana, called "Maremmana primitivo", are used in TaurOs Project
Image:Maronesa bull.jpg|Maronesa is a primitive and hardy breed from the North of Portugal which has remained aurochs-like in many respects. It is used by TaurOs Project as well.

==Breeding of aurochs-like cattle==
Heck cattle: an attempt from the 1920s to breed a look-alike from modern cattle
In the 1920s two German zoo directors (in Berlin and Munich), the brothers Heinz and Lutz Heck, began a selective breeding program to breed back the aurochs into existence from the descendant domestic cattle. Their plan was based on the concept that a species is not extinct as long as all its genes are still present in a living population. The result is the breed called Heck cattle. It is claimed to bear some resemblance to what is known about the appearance of the wild aurochs in colour and in some cases also horn shape. 
Main breeds used in TaurOs Project. Upper row from left to right: Limia, Maremmana primitivo, Maronesa. Lower row: Podolica, Sayaguesa, Pajuna. Down below, the phenotypic and ecologic breeding target, the Aurochs. 
Scientists of the Polish Foundation for Recreating the Aurochs (PFOT) in Poland want to use DNA from bones in museums to recreate the aurochs. They plan to return this animal to the forests of Poland. The project has gained the support of the Polish Ministry of the Environment. They plan research on ancient preserved DNA. Other research projects have extracted "ancient" DNA over the past twenty years and their results published in such periodicals as Nature and PNAS. Polish scientists believe that modern genetics and biotechnology make recreating an animal almost identical to the aurochs possible. They say this research will lead to examining the causes of the extinction of the aurochs, and help prevent a similar occurrence with domestic cattle. Polish geneticists want to recreate the extinct auroch; 2007-11-28; Science and Scholarship in Poland; Polish Press Agency (PAP) 
In a similar program, TaurOs Project Stichting Taurus Vee, 2010 (Dutch)] is trying to DNA-sequence breeds of primitive cattle to find gene sequences that match those found in "ancient DNA" from aurochs samples. The modern cattle would be selectively bred to try to produce the aurochs-type genes in a single animal. "Breeding Ancient Cattle Back from Extinction", TIME, Stephan Faris, Feb. 12, 2010 TaurOs project selected a number of primitive breeds mainly from Iberia and Italy, such as Sayaguesa Cattle, Maremmana primitivo, Pajuna Cattle, Limia Cattle, Maronesa, Tudanca Cattle and others, which already bear considerable resemblance to the aurochs in certain features. Numerous crossbreed calves have been born already. Stichting Taurus, Official website 

==In culture==

Replica of Chauvet cave art depicting aurochs, Woolly rhino, and wild horses
The aurochs was one of the most important hunting game animals and attained mythic significance early on. As oldest cultural references, aurochs are depicted in many Paleolithic European and Mesopotamian cave paintings such as those found at Lascaux and Livernon in France. When drawn in profile only one horn was visible, which some researchers say gave rise to the legend or Greek mythos of the unicorn, though the elasmotherium, a now extinct Eurasian giant rhinoceros, is a more likely derivation (Phyllis Goldman, 2011, "Pheobe's Unusual Mysteries... Footprints in Time" San Francisco: Allosaurus Publishers http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=rc9nmzy_FasC&oi=fnd&pg=PT3&dq=elasmotherium+unicorn&ots=FUGTguBGd6&sig=qmCl-38qmjc6J_Z1EJgqmCcJ448#v=onepage&q=elasmotherium%20unicorn&f=false) . Early carvings of the aurochs have also been found. The impressive and dangerous aurochs survived into the Iron Age in Anatolia and the Near East, and was worshipped throughout that area as a sacred animal, the Lunar Bull, associated with the Great Goddess and later with Mithras. In 2012, an archaeological mission of the British Museum lead by Lebanese archaeologist, Claude Doumet Serhal, discovered at the site of the old American school in Sidon, Lebanon the remains of bones of wild animals, including those of an aurochs, dating from the late fourth-early third millennium http://www.lorientlejour.com/category/À+La+Une/article/767714/Et_si_Europe_etait_sidonienne_.html . A 1999 archaeological dig in Peterborough, England, uncovered the skull of an aurochs. The front part of the skull had been removed but the horns remained attached. The supposition is that the killing of the aurochs in this instance was a sacrificial act.

Also during antiquity the aurochs was regarded as an animal of cultural value. Aurochs are depicted on the Ishtar Gate. Its horns were often used by Romans as hunting horns. Aurochs were among those wild animals caught for fights (venationes) in arenas. Julius Caesar wrote about aurochs in Gallic War Chapter 6.28:
"...those animals which are called uri. These are a little below the elephant in size, and of the appearance, color, and shape of a bull. Their strength and speed are extraordinary; they spare neither man nor wild beast which they have espied. These the Germans take with much pains in pits and kill them. The young men harden themselves with this exercise, and practice themselves in this sort of hunting, and those who have slain the greatest number of them, having produced the horns in public, to serve as evidence, receive great praise. But not even when taken very young can they be rendered familiar to men and tamed. The size, shape, and appearance of their horns differ much from the horns of our oxen. These they anxiously seek after, and bind at the tips with silver, and use as cups at their most sumptuous entertainments."
16th-century illustration by Teodoro Ghisi, believed to show an aurochs. However, the horns and muzzle differ from those of an aurochs 
The ancient name of the Estonian town of Rakvere, Tarwanpe or Tarvanpea, probably derives from Auroch's head (Tarva pea) in ancient Estonian. The Hebrew Bible contains numerous references to the untameable strength of re'em, (Strong's # 07214) in the Bible (Numbers 23:22 and 24:8, Deuteronomy 33:17, Job 39:9–10, Psalms 22:21, 29:6, 92:10 and Isaiah 34:7) translated in the King James Version as "unicorn" but recognized for the last century as Aurochs. The identification was first made by Johann Ulrich Duerst, Die Rinder von Babylonian, Assyrien und Ägypten(Berlin, 1899:7-8), and was generally accepted, as by Salo Jonas, "Cattle Raising in Palestine" Agricultural History 26.3 (July 1952), pp. 93-104 (The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, Entry for 'Wild Ox', Copyright, 1939, by Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co.) 

When it became rarer, hunting an aurochs was a privilege of the nobility and a sign of a high social status. In the Nibelungenlied the killing of aurochs by Siegfried is described: “Darnach schlug er schiere einen Wisent und einen Elch, starker Ure viere und einen grimmen Schelch”, meaning "After that, he defeated one wisent and one elk, four aurochs and one Schelch". The background of the "Schelch" is dubious. Aurochs horns were commonly used as drinking horns by the nobility, which led to the fact that many aurochs horn sheaths are preserved today (albeit often discoloured). Furthermore, there is a painting by Willem Kalf depicting an aurochs horn. The horns of the last aurochs bulls, which died in 1620, were ornamented with gold and are located at the Livrustkammaren in Stockholm today. 

Schneeberger writes that aurochs were hunted with arrows, nets and hunting dogs. With immobilized aurochs, a ritual was practised which might be regarded as cruel nowadays. Its curly hair on the forehead was cut from the skull of the living aurochs. Belts were made out of this, which were believed to increase the fertility of women. When the aurochs was slaughtered, a cross-like bone was extracted from the heart. This bone, present in domestic cattle as well, contributed to the mystique of the animal and magical powers have been attributed to it. 
Coat of arms of Moldavia from 1481 
In eastern Europe, where the aurochs survived until nearly 400 years ago, the aurochs has left traces in the phraseology. In Russia, a drunken person behaving badly when being drunk was specified as “behaving like an aurochs”, whereas in Poland, strong and big persons were characterized as being “a bloke like an aurochs”. Cis van Vuure: History, Morphology and Ecology of the Aurochs (Bos primigenius). 2002. 

There are cultural references to the aurochs in Central Europe as well, especially as toponyms and on heraldry. For example, the names Ursenbach and Aurach am Hongar are derived from the aurochs. An aurochs head, the traditional arms of the German region Mecklenburg, is included in the coat of arms of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern. The aurochs ("bour" in Romanian, probably derived from Latin bos urus → bourus → bour) was also the symbol of Moldavia; nowadays they can be found in the coat of arms of both Romania and Moldova. In modern-day Romania, there are villages named Boureni. The horn of the aurochs is a charge of the coat of arms of Tauragė, Lithuania (the name itself of Tauragė is derived from "tauras" and "ragas", meaning "auroch" and "horn"). It is also present in the emblem of Kaunas, Lithuania, and was part of the emblem of Bukovina during its time as a Kronland of Austria-Hungary. The Swiss Canton of Uri is named after the aurochs; its yellow flag shows a black aurochs head. East Slavic surnames Turenin, Turishchev, Turov, Turovsky originate from the East Slavic name of the species (Tur). Russian Surnames. Popular Etymological Dictionary. Yu. A. Fedosyuk. 6th Ed. In Slovakia there are toponyms like Turany, Turíčky, Turie, Turie Pole, Turík, Turová (villages), Turiec (river and region), Turská dolina (valley) and others. Turopolje, a large lowland floodplain south of the Sava river in Croatia, got its name from the once-abundant aurochs (Croatian: ).

A 3.5m high and 7.1m long statue of an aurochs was erected in Rakvere in 2002 for the town's 700th birthday. The sculpture, made by artist Tauno Kangro, has become a symbol of the town. Rakvere linn 

==See also==

*Chillingham Cattle
*Ur (rune)

==Notes==
This article incorporates Creative Commons CC-BY-2.5 text from reference. Edwards C.J., Magee D.A., Park S.D.E., McGettigan P.A., Lohan A.J., et al. (2010). "A Complete Mitochondrial Genome Sequence from a Mesolithic Wild Aurochs (Bos primigenius)". PLoS ONE 5(2): e9255. . 

==References==
*American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, 4th edition (AHD4). Houghton Mifflin, 2000. Headwords aurochs, urus, wisent.
*Bunzel-Drüke, M. 2001. Ecological substitutes for Wild Horse (Equus ferus Boddaert, 1785 = E. przewalslii Poljakov, 1881) and Aurochs (Bos primigenius Bojanus, 1827). Natur- und Kulturlandschaft, Höxter/Jena, 4, 10 p. AFKP. Online pdf (298 kB)
*C. Julius Caesar. Caesar's Gallic War. Translator. W. A. McDevitte. Translator. W. S. Bohn. 1st Edition. New York. Harper & Brothers. 1869. Harper's New Classical Library.
*International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature. 2003. Opinion 2027 (Case 3010). Usage of 17 specific names based on wild species which are pre-dated by or contemporary with those based on domestic animals (Lepidoptera, Osteichthyes, Mammalia): conserved. Bull.Zool.Nomencl., 60:81–84.
*Merriam-Webster Unabridged (MWU). (Online subscription-based reference service of Merriam-Webster, based on Webster's Third New International Dictionary, Unabridged. Merriam-Webster, 2002.) Headword aurochs. Accessed 2007-06-02.
*Shaffer, Jim G. (1995). Cultural tradition and Palaeoethnicity in South Asian Archaeology. In: Indo-Aryans of Ancient South Asia. Ed. George Erdosy. ISBN 81-215-0790-1
*Shaffer, Jim G. (1999). Migration, Philology and South Asian Archaeology. In: Aryan and Non-Aryan in South Asia. Ed. Bronkhorst and Deshpande. ISBN 1-888789-04-2.
*Vuure, T. van. 2002. History, morphology and ecology of the Aurochs (Bos primigenius). Lutra 45-1. Online pdf (603 kB)
*Vuure, C. van. 2005. Retracing the Aurochs: History, Morphology and Ecology of an Extinct Wild Ox. Pensoft Publishers. Sofia-Moscow.
*Wilson, Don E. and DeeAnn M. Reeder: Mammals. 

==External links==

*The Extinction Website - Aurochs (Bos primigenius primigenius)
*History of aurochs in Poland
*Breeding Back the Aurochs 2005, web-paper by student Magdalena Michalak at Bryn Mawr College, near Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
*The Aurochs is coming back to European forests and grasslands



