

 

The Islamic conquest of Afghanistan (642–870) began in the middle of the 7th century A Historical Atlas of Afghanistan (2003), by Amy Romano, pg. 18. after the Islamic conquest of Persia was completed, when Arab Muslims defeated the Sassanid Empire at the battles of Walaja, al-Qādisiyyah and Nahavand. Islamic Conquest, Library of Congress Country Studies on Afghanistan The Muslim Arabs then began to move towards the lands east of Persia and in 642 captured the city, Herat. Afghanistan, The 7th-18th centuries, Encyclopædia Britannica By 667, the Afghan area was under invasion by the Arabs but in 683 Kabul revolted and completely routed the invading army which was led by the Governor of Seistan. It was not until 870 that Kabul and the Afghan area was brought under control by the Saffarids or the Arabs. Ancient Indian History and Civilization, by Sailendra Nath Sen, p 347. The complete conversion of Afghanistan to Islam was during the period of the Ghaznavids in the 10th century.

==Caliphate==

Names of territories during the Caliphate
The invasion of Persia was completed five years after the death of the Islamic Prophet Muhammad, and all of the Persian territories came under Arab control, though pockets of tribal resistance continued for centuries in the Afghan territories. During the 7th century, Arab armies made their way into the region of Afghanistan from Khorasan with the new religion of Islam. At this point in time, the area that is currently Afghanistan had a multi-religious population consisting of Hindus, Buddhists, Zoroastrians, Jews, and others.

===Kabul Shahis===

The area had been under the rule of the Buddhist and then Hindu dynasty called the Kabul Shahis since the 5th century. The Arabs were unable to succeed in converting the population because of constant revolts from the mountain tribes in the Afghan area, which may have been recognized as Pashtuns. The Hindu Shahi were defeated in the early part of the 10th century by Mahmud of Ghazna who ruled between 998 and 1030. He expelled the Hindus from Gandhara. Afghanistan: a new history By Martin Ewans Edition: 2, illustrated Published by Routledge, 2002 Page 15 ISBN 0-415-29826-1, ISBN 978-0-415-29826-1 Earlier in 870, Yaqub bin Laith as-Saffar, a local ruler from the Saffarid dynasty of Zaranj, Afghanistan, conquered most of present-day Afghanistan in the name of Islam. In many cases, the people he conquered had rebelled against their Islamic overloards and reverted to prior forms of worship. Dupree, Nancy Hatch (1971) "Sites in Perspective (Chapter 3)" An Historical Guide To Afghanistan Afghan Tourist Organization, Kabul, OCLC 241390 

From the 8th century to the 9th century, many inhabitants of what is present-day Afghanistan, Pakistan, and areas of northern India were converted to Sunni Islam. It is surmised from the writings of Al Biruni that some Pashtuns living in Pakhtunkhwa (present-day western Pakistan) had not been completely converted. Al Biruni, writing in Tarikh al Hind, also alludes to the Pashtun tribes of Pakhtunkhwa as Hindus. 

 

Various historical sources such as Martin Ewans, E.J. Brill and Farishta have recorded the introduction of Islam to Kabul and other parts of Afghanistan to the invasions of Mahmud of Ghazna 

Al-Idirisi (1100-1165/1166) testifies that until as late as the 12th century, a contract of investiture for every Hindu Shahi king was performed at Kabul and that here he was obliged to agree to certain ancient conditions which completed the contract. Al-Idrisi, p 67, Maqbul Ahmed; Al-Hind, the Making of the Indo-Islamic World, 1991, p 127, Andre Wink. 

During the end of the 9th century, the Samanids extended its rule from Bukhara to as far south as the Indus River and west into most of Persia. Although Arab Muslim intellectual life was still centered in Baghdad, Shi'a Islam, predominated in the Samanid areas at this time. By the mid-10th century, the Samanid Dynasty had crumbled in the face of attacks from Turkish tribes to the north and from the Ghaznavids, a rising Turkic dynasty in Afghanistan.

The region was ruled by Hindu and Buddhist dynasty called the Kabul Shahis since the 5th century. The Arabs were unable to succeed in converting the population of that area because of constant revolts from the mountain tribes. In 870, Ya'qub-i Laith Saffari, a local Persian The Encyclopedia of world history, Editors Peter N. Stearns and William Leonard Langer, (Houghton Mifflin Company, 2001), 115 ruler from the Saffarid dynasty of Zaranj, Afghanistan, conquered most of the cities of present-day Afghanistan in the name of Islam. 

During the 8th through the 9th centuries, many inhabitants of what is present-day Afghanistan and western Pakistan were converted to Sunni Islam. In some cases, however, people that were conquered by the Muslims would rebel and revert to prior forms of worship. The mountain areas were still not completely converted and remained largely by people of non-Muslim faiths. In a book called Hudud-al-Alam, written in 982, it mentions a village near Jalalabad, Afghanistan, where the local king used to have many Hindu, Muslim and Afghan wives. Willem Vogelsang, The Afghans, Edition: illustrated Published by Wiley-Blackwell, 2002, Page 18, ISBN 0-631-19841-5, ISBN 978-0-631-19841-3 (LINK) 

===Ghaznavids and Ghurids===

Out of the Samanid dynasty came the Ghaznavids, whose warriors forged the first great Islamic empire from Ghazni (Afghanistan) that spanned much of the Iranian plateau, Central Asia and conducted many successful raids into India. During the end of the 9th century, the Samanids extended its rule from Bukhara to as far south as the Indus River and west into most of Persia. By the mid-10th century, the Samanid dynasty had crumble in the face of attacks from Turkish tribes to the north and from the Ghaznavids, a rising Turkic Muslim dynasty in Afghanistan. Besides Turkic people, large part of the Ghaznavid Empire was made up of local Muslim Afghans from what is now Afghanistan and western parts of Pakistan.

It is surmised from the writings of Al Biruni that some Afghans who lived in west of India (modern-day Afghanistan) had not been completely converted to Islam.
The Ghaznavid Empire. Its main cappital was Ghazni, Afghanistan, and Lahore in Pakistan served as the second capital.

Various historical sources such as Martin Ewans, E.J. Brill and Farishta have recorded that the complete conversion of Afghanistan, Pakistan to Islam was during the rule of Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni. Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni

Al-Idirisi testifies that until as late as the 12th century, a contract of investiture for every Shahi king was performed at Kabul and that here he was obliged to agree to certain ancient conditions which completed the contract. The Ghaznavid military incursions assured the domination of Sunni Islam in what is now Afghanistan and western Pakistan. The most renowned of the dynasty's rulers was Mahmud of Ghazni, who consolidated control over the areas south of the Amu Darya then carried out devastating raids into India. With his booty from India, Mahmud built a great capital at Ghazni, founded universities, and patronized scholars. By the time of his death, Mahmud ruled a vast empire that stretched from Kurdistan to the entire Hindu Kush region as far east as the Punjab as well as territories far north of the Amu Darya. However, as occurred so often in this region, the demise in 1030 of this military genius who had expanded the empire to its farthest reaches was the death knell of the dynasty itself. The rulers of the Ghurids of Ghor in modern-day Afghanistan, captured and burned Ghazni in 1149, just as the Ghaznavids had once conquered Ghor. Not until 1186, however, was the last representative of the Ghaznavids uprooted by the Ghorids from his holdout in Lahore, in the Punjab.

==See also==
*History of Afghanistan
*Timeline of Afghanistan
*History of Arabs in Afghanistan
*Pre-Islamic Hindu and Buddhist heritage of Afghanistan
*Muslim conquests

==References==

==Further reading==
*Elliot, Sir H. M., Edited by Dowson, John. The History of India, as Told by Its Own Historians. The Muhammadan Period; published by London Trubner Company 1867–1877. (Online Copy: The History of India, as Told by Its Own Historians. The Muhammadan Period; by Sir H. M. Elliot; Edited by John Dowson; London Trubner Company 1867–1877 - This online Copy has been posted by: The Packard Humanities Institute; Persian Texts in Translation; Also find other historical books: Author List and Title List)

==External links==
* The Guardian: "Lost Tribe Struggles for Survival"
* Press Trust of India :"Inscription throws new light to Hindu rule in Afghanistan "
*Association for the protection of Afghan Archeology

Afghanistan



